---
title: The Best and Worst in Human History
subtitle: Why the New Atheists Can't Even Beat D'Souza 
author: Greg Perkins
email: greg@ecosmos.com
date: May 2008
note: Originally published on Diana Hsieh's blog NoodleFood in May of 2008.
layout: article
---

In the firefight between Christian apologist Dinesh D'Souza and "New Atheists" such as Christopher
Hitchens, Richard Dawkins, and Sam Harris, the New Atheists are suffering serious damage. The
tragedy is that D'Souza wouldn't stand a snowball's chance if they had a strong philosophical
grounding.

For example, several of the New Atheists point to the Inquisition and Crusades and Witch Trials of
early Christianity, the deadly Jihad waged in the name of Islam today, and so on --- and D'Souza
agrees this is a terrible toll that religion is responsible for. But he goes on to argue that when
you actually look at the numbers, this responsibility is minuscule in comparison to the slaughter
of over *100 million* by the atheistic regimes of the 20th century. So he contends it is obvious
that "Atheism, not religion, is responsible for the mass murders of history."

This point has devastated the New Atheists. They try to defuse it by arguing for some causal
association between religion and those bloody regimes: if not explicitly by talking about the
Catholicism in Hitler and Nazi Germany, then implicitly by gesturing to a "religious mindset" or
some other vague influence of religion. But discussion of the Catholic connection to Hitler and
Nazi Germany quickly turns into a back-and-forth of citations from competing historical experts.
And while the dust is swirling over whether religion *might*be connected to that one part of 20th
Century totalitarianism, D'Souza points to the explicitly godless Communist regimes. The New
Atheists have been reduced to weakly objecting that the Crusades and Inquisition were done "in the
name of" Christianity, while Communism and Nazism weren't done in the name of atheism --- but given
all the references that can be made to those regimes' explicit work to eradicate God, this approach
is not convincing. The New Atheists are struggling because they aren't able to frame the issue
properly.

### What Atheism Isn't

First, consider that atheism is *not* itself an ideology; there is no such thing as an "atheist
mindset" or an "atheist movement." Atheism *per se* hasn't inspired and doesn't lead to anything in
particular because it is an effect --- not a cause --- and there are countless reasons for a person
to not believe in God, ranging from vicious to innocent to noble. The newborn baby lacks a belief
in God, as does the Postmodern Nihilist, the Communist, and the Objectivist --- but each for
entirely different reasons having dramatically different implications. So lumping all of these
together under the "atheist" label as if that were a meaningful connection is profoundly confused.
Yet this is exactly what the New Atheists do and encourage: they talk about how there are so many
atheists out there, and advocate their banding together into an atheist community to seek
fellowship, foster cultural change, build a political voice, and so on.¹ But what would a committed
Communist and an Objectivist have in common --- regarding what they *do* believe, why they believe
it, how that leads them to live personally, the sort of social system they would strive for in
government? Nothing. They are polar opposites in principle and practice, across the philosophical
board.

The New Atheists can't rebuff D'Souza because he is actually following their own lead to associate
them with brutal totalitarian regimes. And worse, that confusion makes it difficult to see the
fundamental cause of the misery and bloodshed found across *all* of those failures of
humanity --- from the early Christian Crusades and Inquisition, through the 20th Century
totalitarian regimes, up to the Islamic theocracies in the Middle East today. The important
contrast is not atheism vs. religion, but rather *rationality vs. irrationality*.

### The Wages of Irrationality

All of that bloodshed is a result of people rejecting reason as the way to do business in
reality --- which means rejecting our only means of peaceful and productive coexistence. Operating
in the realm of reason, people are oriented to the facts, their means of dealing with one another
is persuasion, and reality is the court of final appeal when there is disagreement. Take
scientists, for example: necessarily focused on reason and reality, they resolve their scientific
disputes with logic and by reference to facts. We don't find them fragmenting into sects and
breaking out into violence over their disagreements. Indeed, just the opposite happens: the body of
scientific knowledge converges over time as disagreements are sorted out and facts are
acknowledged. Their successes and this convergence don't come from the use of guns and clubs, but
from a commitment to reason and reality, facts and logic.

While it is easy to see brutes in totalitarian regimes reaching for a gun rather than peacefully
persuading free minds, the connection to force may not be so obvious in the case of people of
faith. Yet just as reason and freedom go together, so do their antagonists, faith and force. As Ayn
Rand observed, "every period of history dominated by mysticism, was a period of statism, of
dictatorship, of tyranny" --- and she underscored this shared rejection of reason in identifying
the two as species of the same basic animal: the brutes as "mystics of muscle," and the faithful as
"mystics of spirit." To see how religious faith plays into the use of force, consider theologians
in contrast to the scientists discussed above. Here we find ever-expanding divergence and
fragmentation in their body of thought --- just notice how religions and the denominations within
them have multiplied through history. And we don't see believers resolving disagreements over their
articles of faith by persuasion and reference to the facts of reality --- whether it is Muslims vs.
Christians, Catholics vs. Protestants, Baptists vs. Mormons, or one part of a congregation breaking
away from another. This is because articles of faith aren't based on a grasp of the facts of
reality, and so they can't be explained or defended by references to the facts of reality. Since
people of faith can't resolve such differences using facts and rational persuasion, they are left
with only one alternative: force.

### Having it Both Ways

Besides trying to tar his opponents with the worst atrocities in history, D'Souza regularly tries
to give Christianity credit for mankind's positive strides. For instance, he argues in [an
op-ed](http://www.townhall.com/columnists/DineshDSouza/2007/10/31/what_has_atheism_done_for_us) that
"Christianity has illuminated the greatest achievements of the culture" such as the rise of
science, human rights, equality for women and minorities, ending slavery, and so forth. That "when
you examine history you find that all of these values came into the world because of Christianity."
He contrasts Christianity and atheism, saying that these advances arrived in Christendom and by the
hands of Christians --- not atheists. And he uses this to score extra points in debate by asking
his opponents what atheism has to offer humanity, other than the chance to undermine all that
progress.

Once again, such a comparison is fundamentally confused. Recall that atheism is not itself an
ideology and therefore doesn't lead people to do anything in particular --- good or bad. So again
we need to approach the issue in terms that will actually shed some light. The illuminating
question to consider is: What does *reason* offer humanity over faith?

Here we see a striking contrast. Every discovery, every invention, every new idea that guided every
step we have taken up from the poor, nasty, brutish, and short lives of those who came before has
been made possible by one thing: thinking. Revelation never delivered a vaccine or explained the
rainbow. Faith never designed a building or fed a baby. Submission to authority never discovered a
better social organization or put a man on the moon. The power of this-worldly reason did.

Even the broadest strokes of history make this clear: Mankind stagnated for a thousand years
through the Dark Ages while the Christian faith reigned supreme. Then what changed? Mankind started
to believe that this world matters and that we are worthy and capable of living in it. The
suffocating grip of faith and otherworldliness began to loosen as more people turned to reason and
reality, and the West clawed its way from darkness into the Renaissance and Enlightenment. It took
this-worldly thinking to discover the methods of science --- not scripture and revelation, which
had been present for millennia. It took free minds aimed at the task of living on earth to ignite
the Industrial Revolution and the Information Revolution, and to deliver every bounty in the
explosion of progress that followed --- not prayer and intercession, which have been with us for
all time.

Correlation isn't causation. Obviously, long-standing Christianity only accommodated the relatively
recent changes that unleashed minds brought while its overwhelming authority eroded. We were
delivered from the Christian Dark Ages *despite* Christianity, not because of it. Countless lives
were made shorter and more miserable by its cruel stranglehold --- and how much higher would we be
flying now without its dead weight?

The New Atheists haven't been able to slam-dunk D'Souza because they lack the [objective
philosophical
perspective](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0452011019?ie=UTF8&tag=ecosmoscom-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0452011019) necessary
to penetrate to the core of these issues. In this case, their struggles reveal a failure to
genuinely appreciate how religion is not itself the fundamental problem --- irrationality is.
Religion constitutes just one form of unreason, and the only thing that makes it particularly
noteworthy and dangerous is that it has at its heart an explicit, committed, philosophical attack
on reason: extolling faith as a virtue.

* * * * *

Other articles in this series:

-   The Best and Worst in Human History
-   [Science vs. Miracles](science-miracles)
-   [The Gap in Religious Thought](god-of-the-gaps)
-   [Morality and Life](morality-life)

* * * * *

1.  Sam Harris stands out as an exception to advocating atheists banding together under the atheist
    banner, though his rejection of the label appears to be more of a pragmatic move to avoid
    troublesome connotations than a principled avoidance of the basic mistake it represents.