---
title: Libertarian vs. Objectivist Thinking
subtitle: Why Objectivists Reject Libertarianism
author: Greg Perkins
contact: /
date: November 2009
note: Originally posted on Diana Hsieh's blog, NoodleFood, November 2009.
layout: article
---

The Cato Institute hosted [a book forum](http://www.cato.org/event.php?eventid=6416) with the
authors of the two new Rand biographies, [*Ayn Rand and the World She
Made*](http://www.amazon.com/Ayn-Rand-World-She-Made/dp/0385513992/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&s=books&qid=1257286602&sr=8-1) by
Anne C. Heller, and [*Goddess of the Market: Ayn Rand and the American
Right*](http://www.amazon.com/Goddess-Market-Rand-American-Right/dp/0195324870/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&s=books&qid=1257286634&sr=8-1) by
Jennifer Burns. Cato's David Boaz ran the forum, setting the context, introducing the authors, and
running the Q&A.

I am interested in the two books, so I wanted to hear the authors as they presented some of their
thoughts and showed their mettle in the back-and-forth. The bottom line? Burns seems honest in her
scholarship and sincere in her engagement. She said a lot of interesting things, and I want to hear
more from her despite some weaknesses due to a lack of grounding in Rand's system of thought.
Heller didn't come across nearly as well, which left me much less interested in her work. And then
there's Boaz.

Boaz began by speaking of the enduring influence of Rand, especially on libertarians and
conservatives, and about the recent surge in interest in her and her work. He agreed with a Liberty
magazine [review](http://libertyunbound.com/article.php?id=420) of Heller's book, saying that
"There can be no question about the fact that Rand remains America's most influential libertarian,
with the possible exception of Milton Friedman, and America's most influential novelist of ideas."
Extending this, Boaz characterized *Atlas Shrugged* as a libertarian book, and Rand as a
libertarian who has done more than anybody in our time to introduce people to libertarian ideas.

What got my attention was Boaz's treatment of the elephant in the room: he chuckled that many
listening may wince at his talking that way, that indeed Rand would have disagreed with being
classified as a libertarian ([this](http://aynrandlexicon.com/lexicon/libertarians.html) would be
an [understatement](http://www.aynrand.org/site/PageServer?pagename=education_campus_libertarians))
and that "many of her fans maintain that point even now." He dismissed all of this, saying in
effect that if it looks like a duck, walks like a duck, and quacks like a duck, then it's a duck.
You see, "anybody who believes in individual rights, free enterprise, and strictly limited
government is a libertarian. And Ayn Rand certainly did." QED. Yet, he informs us, somehow this
impeccable logic is lost on the "high priests" of Rand's estate, who refused to let any of her
material appear in his book, [*The Libertarian
Reader*](http://www.amazon.com/Libertarian-Reader-Contemporary-Writings-Friedman/dp/0684847671/ref=sr_1_3?ie=UTF8&s=books&qid=1257188105&sr=8-3).

As an Objectivist, I see a different puzzle here: Many people, libertarians in particular, clearly
admire and profit from Rand's ability to analyze and integrate, to identify widespread and
longstanding false alternatives and package deals time and again, and to then offer something
better. So I find it odd that when they see Rand apparently *ignoring* the incredibly
straightforward point that she fits their definition, that they don't pause to consider whether
there might be some more basic reason for her balking so.

And of course there is. Here's a hint: it's an epistemology thing.

Concepts are important. They are how we organize our knowledge of the world so we can act in
service to our lives. Good concepts are immensely helpful (see the basic ideas that ushered in the
fruits of the Enlightenment and Industrial Revolution), and bad ones can really hurt us. What if,
for example, your moral system left you seeing the bully and the victim who fights back as morally
indistinguishable? As we've seen with pacifism, the result of such thinking is unjust and
destructive to all concerned, both personally and socially: victims are morally if not legally
discouraged from defending themselves, predators are only emboldened, and this view naturally
translates to unjust and destructive cultural sentiments, laws, and policies like those against
simply "violence." So it makes all the difference to distinguish sharply between aggressive and
defensive use of force because these are in fact morally opposite things with existentially
opposite effects on human lives. Examples abound, but the general point to appreciate is that
Objectivists are methodologically careful about this sort of thing because they grasp that
accepting *any* concept which treats essentially identical things as opposites, or opposite things
as essentially identical, ultimately means inviting difficulty if not disaster in our efforts to
successfully navigate reality.

Now consider the libertarian way of thinking about political classification. Rejecting the
generally useless left-right spectrum, they offer a two-dimensional approach based on degrees of
personal and economic freedom which is often shared via their educational and
recruiting [tool](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World%27s_Smallest_Political_Quiz), the [Nolan
Chart](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nolan_Chart). In this view, libertarianism is neither left nor
right, and it stands fundamentally opposed to totalitarianism. This sets up the natural axis
of *size or extent of government* as their key normative criterion, which is pretty easy to pick
out in their policies and rhetoric and reactions to world events. This is also why libertarians
have always had influential anarchists in their ranks: even those who might be wary of the
"extreme" of anarchism have no principled objection to it because, in their own basic way of
thinking, anarchism is the natural full *opposite* of the evil of totalitarianism --- indeed, they
have framed it as the pinnacle of libertarianism.

We can now appreciate what Rand was signaling with her outrage at being grouped or associated in
any way with [anarchists](http://aynrandlexicon.com/lexicon/anarchism.html) in particular and
libertarians in general: she was refusing the mental, personal, and social chaos that flows from a
fundamentally flawed way of grasping things. Rand understood that the essential concept in politics
is individual rights, and so she identified totalitarianism and anarchism as indistinguishable in
what's important: their complete lack of an objective recognition and systematic protection of
human rights. In contrast, as noted above, the libertarian way of thinking mis-classifies
totalitarianism and anarchism as moral opposites by focusing on the inessential characteristic of
size. If the purpose of politics is to sort out and enact the conditions required for people to
successfully live among one another, this kind of confusion is about as disastrous as it
gets --- even while self-consciously seeking the good, the conceptual lens of libertarianism drives
you in the opposite direction.

And conversely, the libertarian framework fails to capture crucial differences. Consider a powerful
government that performs *all and only* its proper functions in the defense of individual rights, and
one that happens to have all the same laws and institutions but also has, say, conscription on the
books just in case war breaks out. These two governments are all but indistinguishable (and neither
is smiled on) in the libertarians' basic classification scheme based on size. But Objectivists see
these two as moral opposites because one is committed to the essential task of the defense of 
rights and the other is not. Even though not currently violating any rights, the government with
conscription laws clearly rejects the key principle of the field. It has no principled defense
against a slippery slope to serfdom.

The politics of liberty that Objectivism advocates really does depend on a particular philosophical
foundation. The Libertarian movement might be in a better position to understand this if they
weren't so eager to [set
aside](http://www.dianahsieh.com/blog/2004/08/fable-of-cardiac-surgeon-and.html) the fact that
fundamental ideas are critically important.

While scholarly leaders like Boaz should surely know better, there are plenty of people who
innocently adopt the libertarian way of thinking about government because it seems to line up
reasonably well with fundamental American values like strictly limited government, respect for
rights, and capitalism. (Indeed, I was just such a person.) But even innocent use doesn't mitigate
the very real problems and dangers discussed above. So Objectivists will continue to pointedly
reject the libertarian label and its conceptual basis in the interests of moving our culture toward
one that genuinely values liberty.
