---
title: Morality and Life
subtitle: Why the New Atheists Can't Even Beat D'Souza 
author: Greg Perkins
email: greg@ecosmos.com
date: May 2008
note: Originally published on Diana Hsieh's blog NoodleFood in May of 2008.
layout: article
---

In one of his debates with the "New Atheists," Dinesh D'Souza talked about how religion demands
that we move outside of ourselves and sacrifice, and alleged that atheists chafe under the moral
rules of Christianity that hold them accountable. He went on to say atheism is a rebellion against
that --- that atheism is not really an intellectual revolt against unsubstantiated ideas, but
a *moral* revolt against rules they simply don't like being held to. While the New Atheists have a
few sharp things to say to religionists on the moral front, their response has lacked the clarity
and broad force of the fundamental response that needs to be delivered.

### Values vs. Subjectivism

To begin with, D'Souza's charges do have some merit because his opponents stumble badly with
respect to the issue of values. Most secular thinkers subscribe to the idea that values are somehow
arbitrary, relative, based in emotions like empathy or in "intuitions," subject to a collective
agreement of society or to the wishes or whims of the individual. In all its varieties, such
subjectivism is open to criticism because there is, in fact, an objective basis for values: What
makes something good or bad is that it furthers or frustrates the goals of some agent, and the most
fundamental alternative any organism can face is life or death, existence or nonexistence as a
living being. This is to say, *life* is the ultimate yardstick by which all subsidiary goals and
alternatives are measured for their value-significance.¹ Sunlight and water are valuable to the
plant, which turns its leaves and grows its roots to gain those things and maintain its existence.
Nuts and shelter are valuable to the squirrel, as is avoiding hungry predators. And the same is
true of people: the good is that which ultimately furthers our lives.

This perspective makes it clear that values are a *factual* concern, not a matter of arbitrary
opinion or feelings or loose "intuitions." Merely hoping, feeling, or asserting something is good
can't make it stand in a positive relationship to a life, any more than declaring 2+2=5 would make
that so. The true and the good are determined by the facts of reality, and we avoid grasping the
facts and acting accordingly at our peril. This is why any inwardly-focused, subjectivistic
conception of values is necessarily bankrupt, a threat to human life.

But for those accused of rebelling against the moral absolutes of God, there is a silver lining to
be enjoyed in this lesson: the religionists are themselves guilty of the sin of moral subjectivism.
The essence of subjectivism is acting on whim --- wishing, assuming, feeling, or declaring that
facts will align themselves with thoughts and lives. Of course, this gets it exactly backwards:
thoughts and lives must align themselves with the facts because facts are absolutes to be
discovered, not declared. Merely hoping or asserting something is good doesn't make it so, and it
doesn't matter whether we're talking about the whim of a lone subjectivist deciding what is good or
bad, the whim of an entire civilization voting on it, or the whim of a "supernatural" mind
decreeing it. So the religious who claim to have an absolute morality are really only subjectivists
of a supernatural stripe. The trouble for them is that their sort of subjectivism is just as false
as any other: God telling Abraham that it is good to slay his innocent son Isaac doesn't make it
good. His ordering the enslavement of entire peoples in the Old Testament doesn't make that good.
On and on --- the bottom line is that calling poison "food" doesn't make it nutritious, and
pretending otherwise is to court destruction.

### Determinism vs. Morality

Next, consider that we humans don't *automatically* act in support of our lives like squirrels and
plants do. We have the power to freely choose to harm ourselves, to do the wrong thing, to not
pursue the values we know are required for our existence as living organisms. We don't have
instincts to tell us how to build shelter or to guide us in choosing food over poison --- we have
to learn those things, whether it means building a lean-to or erecting a skyscraper, and whether it
means avoiding the wrong mushrooms or properly cooking a gourmet chicken dish to ensure it is not
just tasty but safe. In fact, being the rational animal born without conceptual knowledge to act
by, we have to learn *everything* we need to know about what furthers or harms our lives --- and we
have to choose to abide by that knowledge or perish.

This is especially important in the case of the most abstract, most fundamental knowledge that
guides our choices and actions --- the overarching principles which can help us to consistently
pursue the values needed to maintain our existence and flourish over the span of an entire
lifetime. These are *moral principles* like honesty, productiveness, justice, and integrity.
Essentially, a proper morality consists of grasping these kinds of principles for the support of
human life: i.e., recognize these basic facts and flourish, or evade them and suffer. Indeed, we
need morality *because* we are conceptual animals. This is why moral codes have appeared wherever
and whenever humans have appeared; the impact of moral values (both proper and improper) is
tremendous precisely because of how fundamental they are to our existence, guiding us in myriad
concrete circumstances great and small.

Just like any other matter of fact, we can approach morality rationally and scientifically, working
to discover, validate, and teach each other about the relevant fundamental principles. Such a
project is just as feasible --- and just as challenging --- as discovering and sharing the
fundamental principles of engineering or economics. But of course this kind of development is only
possible if we recognize the nature of the field in the first place, and this is another terrible
weakness in the New Atheists and their scientific friends that prevents their giving a robust
answer to the likes of D'Souza. The fashionable but unnecessary materialism and mechanistic
determinism that is prevalent among them leads to the denial of the very fact that gives rise to
morality in the first place: that we have volitional minds and our choices have life-and-death
consequences. This denial has hobbled the scientific study of morality, leaving them looking in the
wrong place and for the wrong thing. Notice the categorical error in such prominent programs as
"evolutionary morality," where researchers look for moral behavior in the actions
of *non-volitional, non-conceptual* animals like mice and birds. And in how they search for the
roots of morality in evolved behavior "modules" in brains, neglecting the basic fact that the moral
is the learned and chosen --- not the inbuilt and determined.² A sound philosophical foundation
would help them be more productive and less prone to these sorts of distractions and blind alleys.

### Sacrifice vs. Life

Finally, there is the most disastrous error confusing the scientific study of morality and stopping
the New Atheists from knocking D'Souza out of the intellectual ring: they may challenge the
existence of God, but they uncritically accept the moral standard that Christianity has injected
into Western culture. That is, they accept the moral standard of altruism, literally "other-ism," a
moral standard of sacrifice. This can be seen in various facets of their struggles to explain
secular morality: they restrict the domain of morality to the *social*, they
uphold *sacrificial* sentiments and principles of conduct, and they cite scientists who work to
understand the biological basis for morality by searching for *altruistic* behavior in animals.
(Though the scientists muddy the sacrificial core of the concept by also reflexively labeling
life-serving, non-sacrificial social behaviors better characterized as cooperation, investment, and
trade as "altruism." Sacrifice means surrendering a higher value for a lower one or no value at
all --- not giving up a lesser value to gain a greater one.) Having assumed an altruistic standard
of morality, the New Atheists and most secular thinkers are likewise led to the conclusion that
determining the good merely comes down to determining who or what one has a duty to sacrifice to:
neighbor, family, tribe, race, society, nation, leader, species, environment, god.

But sacrifice can't be the proper standard of morality. In fact, it represents the *inversion* of a
proper moral code because giving up values is inimical to life. Fully and consistently adhering to
such a standard means a swift death, so anybody accepting the moral standard of sacrifice lives
only through the inconsistency of compromising and diluting it, mixing in elements of its
antithesis. But managing to survive poison by mixing it with food doesn't render it part of a
healthy diet, much less a central staple. Sacrifice *per se* is the opposite of the good, and
seeking it is irrational, so the New Atheists will forever flail in trying to scientifically
support or rationally justify such an approach to morality.

Genuine virtue consists in creating values, not in surrendering them --- in focusing on reality and
discovering a vaccine, in searching our spiritual nature and producing a play, in building a
stadium, in raising a loving family, in digging a canal, writing a textbook, cooking a meal. This
understanding drives the proper response to D'Souza's charge of rebelliousness: Any healthy person
armed with the correct perspective would reject the subjectivist moral code of Christianity and its
enshrinement of sacrifice because it is fundamentally set against human life and happiness.
Instead, we should seek a morality that is truly absolute, reality-based, scientific, and which
rejects human sacrifice in its every form and degree as irrational.³ We should seek a genuine
morality of life.

* * * * *

Other articles in this series:

-   [The Best and Worst in Human History](best-worst)
-   [Science vs. Miracles](science-miracles)
-   [The Gap in Religious Thought](god-of-the-gaps)
-   Morality and Life

* * * * *

1.  Ayn Rand demonstrated this in her essay, "The Objectivist Ethics," which is explored in depth
    in the book, [*Viable Values: A Study of Life as the Root and Reward of
    Morality*](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0847697614?ie=UTF8&tag=ecosmoscom-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0847697614) by
    Dr. Tara Smith.
2.  This is certainly not to say that evolutionary biology should stand mute on morality --- values
    are rooted in the phenomenon of life, after all. I am arguing that scientists must take care to
    recognize the difference between the slate and what is written on it. For example, they might
    profitably investigate the evolutionary basis of what gives rise to and *enables* morality: the
    phenomenon of volitional, conceptual minds.
3.  For further investigation of such a morality, I recommend the bite-sized introductory
    book, [*Loving
    Life*](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0971373701?ie=UTF8&tag=ecosmoscom-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0971373701) by
    Craig Biddle and its scholarly yet accessible big brother from Cambridge University
    Press, [*Ayn Rand's Normative Ethics: The Virtuous
    Egoist*](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0521705460?ie=UTF8&tag=ecosmoscom-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0521705460) by
    Dr. Tara Smith.