---
title: Science vs. Miracles
subtitle: Why the New Atheists Can't Even Beat D'Souza 
author: Greg Perkins
contact: /
date: May 2008
note: Originally published on Diana Hsieh's blog NoodleFood in May of 2008.
layout: article
---

Taking on "New Atheists" such as Richard Dawkins and Christopher Hitchens, Dinesh D'Souza explains
that he wants to strip away a kind of pose: atheists, he says, present themselves as men of data
and evidence, merely following where it leads, when in reality they are faith-filled dogmatists who
only *assume* that there are no gods and that miracles are not possible. In his debate with
Hitchens, he drove this home by asking his opponent to name just one scientific law which he knows
has no exceptions. Hitchens admitted he couldn't and had to stand there sheepishly while D'Souza
crowed that he was leaving room for miracles even while denying them without investigation --- that
the atheist stance for science and against miracles is only based on faith in certain "metaphysical
assumptions." In his view, the real difference between scientists and theologians is that religious
people have enough integrity to admit their beliefs are rooted in faith.

D'Souza's effectiveness in exposing confusion and sowing skepticism illustrates how the New
Atheists and most scientists lack an objective philosophical foundation. With a little training in
the actual relationship between philosophy and science, they could explain how science is not
perched atop blind faith in "metaphysical assumptions," and they could articulate exactly why
miracles should not be dismissed as merely improbable, or even as inherently unverifiable, but as
outright incoherent. In fact, they would know the issue is as stark as this: if miracles are
possible, then science isn't.

To see why, let's begin by looking at what a miracle has to be. We are not talking about just any
improbable happening, and not even something which violates our current understanding of the world
as expressed in scientific laws, like D'Souza tries to argue. The entire point of miracles is to
provide evidence of divine intervention, and surprises which may only reveal a current lack of
understanding can't accomplish that: by that measure, even the tricks of magicians would count as
miracles. Indeed, much of what we enjoy in our modern world would have been considered miraculous
in previous times, from vaccines and medications, to cars, and the Internet and on and on. Yet none
of these prove or even suggest a possibility that there is a God. No, a meaningful miracle is not
merely something which would violate the laws of nature as we currently understand them, but
something which would be a violation of any such law we could *ever* discover. That is, it would
have to be a violation of *lawfulness itself.* That's a tall order.

### Causality and Identity

When we talk about how things act and what they do and why, we are talking about causality. As
Aristotle observed some 2500 years ago, things act according to their natures (their identities).
They act the way they do because of what they are --- balls roll when pushed, and piles of dirt
don't. Eggs break when dropped because that is an expression of their identity as things with a
brittle shell and goo inside, crashing against a hard floor. Action is an expression of identity,
and to understand why and how things act the way they do, we seek to understand what those things
are. We seek to understand their identities. So if an egg broke into *song* instead of a messy
puddle, it wouldn't be a normal egg --- it would have to be something else. Because identities
include capacities for action, we know and classify things by what they do, too.

The crucial thing to keep in mind about action being an expression of identity is that everything
has identity merely in virtue of existing, not because of any dictate. Think of this as a *law of
existence*, something true of Being itself. As Ayn Rand observed some 50 years ago: to be, is to
be *something* --- to be something particular, to be this and not that, to be capable of these
actions and reactions and transformations, and not those. Or from the opposite perspective: to not
be anything particular, is to simply *not be*. And this is not any article of faith or merely a
"metaphysical assumption." This is a philosophical axiom reaching below any will to the bedrock of
existence itself, a self-evident truth that lies at the base of all truths and all thinking, a fact
so absolute and inescapable that it is actually reaffirmed by any attempt to deny it.

It is this ironclad law of existence that tells us there are scientific laws to pursue in the first
place. It is how we can have absolute confidence that we are in a position to plumb the depths of
the world, that we can seek to understand the identities of the things which are acting and
interacting in nature, and that it is worth working to understand it all in terms of ever broader
and deeper principles. The fruitfulness of this pursuit can't be denied: just look around and
marvel at how our striving for a rational, scientific understanding of the world has improved our
lives in countless ways.

And it is this very same law of existence that also guarantees there can be no miracles for us to
pursue. If we were to somehow experience an "egg miracle," it isn't that we would have found
something we thought was a regular egg that surprised us and needs more study. No, the very idea of
miracles requires violating causality. It requires that a *normal* egg break into song. Or picking
something from the Christian tradition: it requires a *normal* loaf of bread to break into 1000
servings. In short, a genuine miracle requires a thing to act against its own identity --- to have
a contradictory identity --- to literally *not be what it is*, which is incoherent. Everything is
what it is, and contradictions can only exist inside peoples' confused thinking.

### Either-Or

That is why it is one or the other, science or miracles. Accepting the possibility of miracles
means rejecting the very basis of science; accepting the basis of science means rejecting any
possibility of miracles. Indeed, to the degree that scientists entertain the possibility of
miracles, they tragically undercut their own psychological motive and ability to pursue such
knowledge: there is no point in looking for the laws of nature when existence isn't actually lawful
and there is no real understanding to be found. Even if scientists think they can be "practical"
and approach the world as being "almost always lawful," they are still fatally compromised because
every surprise they meet could be a clue that an idea is in need of refinement or correction --- or
it could be an inexplicable miracle from the arbitrary will of God. The harder and more important
the puzzle, the harder it will be to resist that nihilistic pull to simply throw up their hands and
give up being a scientist to blindly assert that it must be an arbitrary intervention.

All of those potential advances lost to scientists giving up on science are a tragedy --- and any
effort spent repelling that call to give up is a waste. At the dawn of science, Francis Bacon said
that "nature, to be commanded, must be obeyed." Knowledge is power precisely because existence is
in fact lawful, and every advance we've achieved up through the wonders of modern civilization is a
brilliant testament to this simple truth.

* * * * *

Other articles in this series:

-   [The Best and Worst in Human History](best-worst)
-   Science vs. Miracles
-   [The Gap in Religious Thought](god-of-the-gaps)
-   [Morality and Life](morality-life)
